# Configuration Modules Platform Integration

The configuration modules source code is intended to be used with some library classes provided by platforms. In order to
integrate configuration modules into a platform's firmware it is important to consider higher-level integration challenges
specific to the platform in addition to the required code changes to integrate all of the pieces.

## High-Level Considerations

1. [Configuration Apps Changes](#configuration-apps-changes) - The setup variable feature will replace an existing UI
application and switch to serial base console input/output. All agents will leverage
[Policy Service](https://github.com/microsoft/mu_basecore/blob/HEAD/PolicyServicePkg/README.md) to set/get
configurations.

1. [Silicon Code Changes](#silicon-code-changes) - The silicon firmware may need changes for:
    1. Add depex statement for drivers to load after Policy Service, the Config Policy to Silicon Policy Mapper(s),
    and the relevant default silicon policy producer(s)
    1. Locate policy protocol/ppis for silicon configuration
    1. Adding default silicon policy producers

1. [Platform Data Flow](#platform-data-flow) - Modules provided in this package for platform to load/update configuration
data.

1. [Platform Data Consumption](#platform-data-consumption) - Description of expected platform workflow on how to consume
data from configuration knobs to convert to policy data.
    1. Add PlatformConfigDataLib with autogenerated data header
    1. Add OemConfigPolicyCreator to receive data from PlatformConfigDataLib and publish the config policy.
    1. Add 1 - n Config Policy to Silicon Policy Mapper(s) to take config policy and override the default silicon
    policies.

1. [Configuration App Code Integration](#configuration-app-code-integration) - How to best integrate the `SetupDataPkg`
collateral into a platform firmware.

1. [Profiles Integration](#profiles-integration) - How to integrate Configuration Profiles into platform firmware.

## Configuration Apps Changes

Instead of rendering all available options in the UEFI front page, which is backed by HII data and complicated UI
frameworks, the configuration applications will focus on configuration data pipeline and actual functionality.

More of this data flow will be documented in [Platform Data Flow](#platform-data-flow) section.

## Silicon Code Changes

For each applicable silicon driver that needs to be configured during UEFI operation, the silicon driver needs to be
updated to pull silicon policy data for its configuration.

For each configurable silicon feature/component/module, one needs to define a structure that contains all necessary
settings. These settings will be populated with a default value during the PEI phase by a default silicon policy
producer.

When a silicon module is executed, the consuming module should fetch its silicon policy data from Policy Service and
configure the hardware accordingly.

## Platform Data Flow

The default silicon policy should be initialized by silicon modules during early PEI after Policy Service is available.
An example is provided in
[mu_tiano_platforms](https://github.com/microsoft/mu_tiano_platforms/blob/HEAD/Platforms/QemuQ35Pkg/PolicyDataGfx/PolicyDataGfx.c).

The OemConfigPolicyCreator should take the autogenerated data provided by PlatformConfigDataLib (via the `gKnobData`
extern structure) and publish the config policy. This module can perform any filtering required by the OEM/platform,
such as overriding the config knobs with updated values from variable storage or a different configuration profile. An
example is provided in
[mu_oem_sample](https://github.com/microsoft/mu_oem_sample/blob/HEAD/OemPkg/OemConfigPolicyCreatorPei/OemConfigPolicyCreatorPei.c).
An example PlatformConfigDataLib is provided in
[mu_tiano_platforms](https://github.com/microsoft/mu_tiano_platforms/blob/HEAD/Platforms/QemuQ35Pkg/Library/Q35ConfigDataLib/Q35ConfigDataLib.c).

Following these two operations, the n number of Config Policy to Silicon Policy Mappers will run, consume the config
policy and override the relevant silicon policies. An example is provided in
[mu_tiano_platforms](https://github.com/microsoft/mu_tiano_platforms/blob/HEAD/Platforms/QemuQ35Pkg/ConfigKnobs/ConfigKnobs.c).

During the rest of boot process, the silicon drivers will consume the updated silicon policies to configure hardware
components or adjust firmware configuration. An example is provided in
[mu_tiano_platforms](https://github.com/microsoft/mu_tiano_platforms/blob/HEAD/Platforms/QemuQ35Pkg/QemuVideoDxe/Driver.c).

## Platform Data Consumption

In order for drivers provided by this package to function as expected, the platform owners are suggested to author
the following routines to properly consume configuration data:

### Platform Silicon Policy Initialization

Per silicon policy definition, platforms are responsible for initializing each silicon policy with default values for
the case that its corresponding configuration policy is not present.

### Platform Config Knob Shim Library

ConfigKnobShimLib provides an interface to query overrides to config knobs. The
[version contained in mu_feature_config](../../Library/ConfigKnobShimLib/) has the common use case, querying variable
storage for the config knobs. A platform may choose to override this library if they do not wish to find config knob
overrides in variable storage.

### PlatformBuild.py Changes

The platform must define `CONF_AUTOGEN_INCLUDE_PATH` in PlatformBuild.py. This is the absolute path that the autogenerated
header files will be placed under as such: `CONF_AUTOGEN_INCLUDE_PATH\Generated\Config*.h`. The UpdateConfigHdr.py
build plugin will create the `Generated` directory if it does not exist.

The platform must define `MU_SCHEMA_DIR` and `MU_SCHEMA_FILE_NAME` in PlatformBuild.py. These are the directory
containing the XML configuration file and the file name of the XML configuration file, respectively. These are split
apart to allow the CI build to discover a test schema to validate this process.

### Autogenerated Header Files

There are three autogenerated headers and one standard structure definition header:

- `<Generated/ConfigClientGenerated.h>` - The Client header
- `<Generated/ConfigServiceGenerated.h>` - The Service header
- `<Generated/ConfigDataGenerated.h>` - The Data header
- `<ConfigStdStructDefs.h>` - The Standard Structure Definition header

The PlatformConfigDataLib includes, in this order, the standard structure definition header, the client header, and the
data header. In this way the structure and enum definitions are populated before the data header attempts to use them.

The OEM platform config policy creator only include the standard structure definition header so that it can operate on
the `KNOB_DATA` structure with generic data.

The Config Policy to Silicon Policy Mapper(s) include, in this order, the standard structure definition header, the
client header, and the service header. In this way the structure and enum definitions as well as the getter definitions
are available for the code using the getters. In our mu_tiano_platforms example, the Config Policy to Silicon Policy
Mapper is compiled with several C files that only include the client header, as the service header is only needed once
per module to query the config knobs out of the config policy.

The Silicon Policy Consumers do not need to include any of the above headers and will instead fetch their configuration
directly from silicon policy.

### Config Knob Validation Functions

The Project Mu XML based configuration provides an OEM/platform with the ability to provide config knob validation
functions to run against config knob overrides to ensure they meet the requirements for a knob. These functions can
be added to the `KNOB_DATA` structure's `Validator` field, say in PlatformConfigDataLib and then run in the OEM
Config Policy Creator after it fetches overrides. If any overrides fail validation (say a value too large), the default
config knob value can be used instead.

## Configuration App Code Integration

1. Ensure all submodules for the platform are based on the latest Project Mu version (check the HEAD of each repo)
1. The prerequisites of this feature is Policy service and Project MU based BDS. This guideline will omit the
integration steps for these features.

### Platform DSC statements

Add the DSC sections below in addition to the OemConfigPolicyCreator, PlatformConfigDataLib, Default Silicon Policy
Creators, and Config Policy to Silicon Policy Mapper(s).

``` bash
[PcdsFixedAtBuild]
  # The GUID of SetupDataPkg/ConfApp/ConfApp.inf: E3624086-4FCD-446E-9D07-B6B913792071
  gEfiMdeModulePkgTokenSpaceGuid.PcdBootManagerMenuFile|{ 0x86, 0x40, 0x62, 0xe3, 0xcd, 0x4f, 0x6e, 0x44, 0x9d, 0x7, 0xb6, 0xb9, 0x13, 0x79, 0x20, 0x71 }

[LibraryClasses]
  SvdXmlSettingSchemaSupportLib |SetupDataPkg/Library/SvdXmlSettingSchemaSupportLib/SvdXmlSettingSchemaSupportLib.inf
  ConfigVariableListLib         |SetupDataPkg/Library/ConfigVariableListLib/ConfigVariableListLib.inf

[LibraryClasses.common.PEIM]
  ConfigKnobShimLib|SetupDataPkg/Library/ConfigKnobShimLib/ConfigKnobShimPeiLib/ConfigKnobShimPeiLib.inf

[Components.X64, Components.AARCH64]
  #
  # Setup variables
  #
  SetupDataPkg/ConfApp/ConfApp.inf {
    <LibraryClasses>
      JsonLiteParserLib|MsCorePkg/Library/JsonLiteParser/JsonLiteParser.inf
  }

[PcdsFixedAtBuild]
  # this GUID should be whatever the OEM Config Policy Creator uses as the Config Policy GUID
  # this is the example GUID from mu_oem_sample. It is used so ConfApp can dump the configuration policy.
  gSetupDataPkgTokenSpaceGuid.PcdConfigurationPolicyGuid|{GUID("ba320ade-e132-4c99-a3df-74d673ea6f76")}
```

Remove the DSC sections below.

``` bash
[Components.X64, Components.AARCH64]
  # MdeModulePkg/Application/UiApp/UiApp.inf {
  #   <LibraryClasses>
  #     NULL|MdeModulePkg/Library/DeviceManagerUiLib/DeviceManagerUiLib.inf
  #     NULL|MdeModulePkg/Library/BootManagerUiLib/BootManagerUiLib.inf
  #     NULL|MdeModulePkg/Library/BootMaintenanceManagerUiLib/BootMaintenanceManagerUiLib.inf
  #     PcdLib|MdePkg/Library/DxePcdLib/DxePcdLib.inf
  # }
```

### Platform FDF statements

Add the FDF sections below.

> Note: This is change is on top of Project MU based BDS and DFCI feature.

``` bash
[FV.YOUR_DXE_FV]
  INF SetupDataPkg/ConfApp/ConfApp.inf
```

Remove the FDF sections below.

``` bash
[FV.YOUR_DXE_FV]
  # INF MdeModulePkg/Application/UiApp/UiApp.inf
```

## Profiles Integration

In order to use configuration profiles, the platform must include the above changes as well as include an XML file that
contains the default values for the generic profile. If additional profiles are required, the platform must include XML
csv delta files for each profile that are overrides on top of the generic profile. These are created through the
[Config Editor UI tool](../../Tools/ConfigEditor.py) by choosing `Save Config Changes to Change File` or
`Save Full Config to Change File` (more details in the
[Configuration Files doc](../ConfigurationFiles/ConfigurationFiles.md)). This feature is still under development and
more documentation will be added as work is completed.
